# PhD Tannic acid based Fibers
Abstract
Tannic acid (TA) is a plant-based polyphenolic molecule with enticing anti-oxidant, anti-bacterial, anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer features, making it a valuable material in bio-medicinal applications. To establish whether TA-based fibers are useful tools in potential medical textiles, e.g., as wound dressing material for prophylaxis against infections and diseases, TA fibers were prepared and employed in biological assays. TA fibers were prepared with 55 weight% TA in ethanol-DI water mixture and fabricated by the electrospinning technique. Bare TA-based fibers were examined and were 1.2±0.1% non-hemolytic and had 8.7±1.7 blood clotting index up to 2 mg/mL concentration. Degradation of bare TA-based fibers was completed in 5 minutes; however, degradation of crosslinked TA-based fibers were 98.3±2.3% and 83.1±5.4% for TA-Ibu and TA in 168 hours. Anti-oxidant activity of TA-based fibers was investigated by TEAC, total phenol content (TPC) and total flavonoid content (TFC) assays. Bare TA fibers possessed the highest anti-oxidant activity of 5.7±0.5 mM trolox equivalent/g, 168.0±2.0 gallic acid equivalent µg/mL and 193.0±17.0 quercetin equivalent µg/mL. Anti-bacterial activity was investigated by the disc diffusion method and the highest inhibition zone diameter was measured as 3.5±0.2 cm against S. aureus (gram +) bacteria; however, the same fiber was detected as producing 2.2±0.5 cm zone diameter for E. coli (gram -) bacteria.
Keywords: Tannic acid fiber; electrospinning; wound dressing; medical textile. 


2.	Materials and Methods 
2.1	Materials
Tannic acid (TA, Sigma-Aldrich, 99%) was used directly as the main material to produce fibers. Ethanol (99%, Carlo Erba) and DI water, 18.2 M.Ω.cm (Millipore-Direct Q UV3), were used as solvents, sodium periodate (NaIO4, Sigma-Aldrich, 99%) was utilized as a crosslinker, and ibuprofen (BASF) was used as a model drug. Folin-Ciocalteau's phenol reagent (FC, Sigma-Aldrich), potassium persulfate (KPS, 99%, Sigma-Aldrich, 2,2′-azino-bis-(3- ethylbenzothioazoline-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS, Aldrich), (±)-6-hydroxy-2,5,7,8-tetramethylchromane-2-carboxylic acid (Trolox) (97% Aldrich), sodium nitrite (Merck, extra pure), and aluminum chloride (Merck, anhydrous powder sublimed from synthesis) were used for antioxidant studies.
2.2 Solution Preparation for Electrospinning
TA was weighed to 5.5 g and transferred into 10 mL of ethanol-water mixture (7:1 volume ratio=8.75 mL of ethanol and 1.25 mL of DI water). After mixing for 3 hours at 500 rpm at room temperature, TA was dissolved and the solution was prepared for electrospinning. 
To produce drug-loaded TA-based fiber, ibuprofen was chosen as a model drug and 55.0 mg ibuprofen was weighed and transferred into the TA solution previously prepared (5.5 g TA in 10 mL solvent mixture dissolved in the solvent for 3 hours). Then, ibuprofen was completely dissolved in TA solution on a magnetic stirrer at 500 rpm for 1 hour at room temperature, and this solution was used as drug-containing TA fiber solution.
The parameters of the electrospinning device were adjusted to 23 kV and 0.3 mL/hour for flow rate than the distance from the tip to the collector was set to 15 cm. The collector was covered with aluminum foil to remove the fibers easily. These parameters were used in the preparation of bare and drug-loaded TA fibers.
2.3. Crosslinking of TA-based Fibers
Crosslinking of TA-based fibers was performed with the protocol established by Allais et al. with some modifications [34]. TA-based fibers were crosslinked with 9 wt% aqueous sodium periodate (NaIO4) solution. The fibers were plunged into NaIO4 solution and after 10 seconds the fibers were taken out and transferred into DI water. The fibers were washed 3 times with DI water and then they were put on aluminum foil to dry at room temperature. 
2.4. Characterization
The morphology of the fibers was evaluated via scanning electron microscope (SEM, Jeol JSM-5600 LV) images. The SEM images of the fibers were attained by placing 1 cm×1 cm fiber on an aluminum stub with carbon tape that was coated with gold (few nm thickness) under a vacuum. The operating voltage of 20 kV was employed to obtain SEM images.
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR spectrophotometer, Perkin–Elmer) was employed in 650-4000 cm-1 spectral range to assess the functional groups on TA fibers.
Thermogravimetric degradation of TA fibers was acquired to assess the thermal stability of the prepared fibers using a thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA, SII TG/DTA 6300) in 30-1000 °C range with 10 °C heating rate employing 200 mL/min flow rate of N2.
2.5 Blood Compatibility of TA-based Fibers 
Blood compatibility of different amounts of TA fibers were examined via hemolysis and blood clotting assays [45,46]. The blood compatibility tests were applied in accordance with the procedure approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee of Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University (2011-KAEK-27/2020-E.2000045671). The details of hemolysis and blood clotting assays are given in the Supporting Information. 
2.6 Degradation of TA-based Fibers and Drug Release Studies
Hydrolytic degradation of TA fibers and drug release from TA-based fibers were examined in phosphate buffered saline solution (PBS) at pH 7.4. TA-based fibers weighing 30.0 mg were place in dialysis membrane (MW cut off 12 kDa, Sigma-Aldrich) and 2 mL of PBS solution was transferred into the dialysis membrane. Then, the membrane containing these fibers was placed into 30 mL PBS in centrifuge tubes. Next, these tubes were placed in a water shaker bath at 37.5 °C. Hydrolytic degradation and drug release extent were determined by UV-VIS spectrometry (T80 + UV/VIS Spectrometer, PG Ins. Ltd). The degradation of TA-based fibers and drug release (ibuprofen) elution from the release media were measured at 264 nm and 276 nm, respectively. The degradation of TA fibers and ibuprofen release amounts were calculated using generated calibration curves for TA and ibuprofen separately in PBS solution. All the measurements were done at least three times and the results are shown as the average of these values with the corresponding standard deviations.   
2.7 Antioxidant Features of TA-based Fibers
Anti-oxidant properties of TA fibers were determined with three different techniques; ABTS+ scavenging test, total phenol content assay (TPC), and total flavonoid content (TFC) tests. The details of these anti-oxidant assays are provided in Supporting Information.
2.8 Anti-bacterial Activity of TA-based Fibers
Anti-bacterial capabilities of TA-based fibers were investigated against E. coli (gram -, ATCC 8739) and S. aureus (gram +, ATCC 6538) microorganisms by the disc diffusion method. Both bacterial strains were revived from stocks at room temperature. The bacteria culture was transferred into nutrient broth and incubated at 35 °C overnight. Following this, the bacteria colonies in nutrient broth were adjusted according to McFarland 0.5 standard to 1 108 colony forming unit (CFU)/mL. The prepared bacterial strains were ready to use for the disc diffusion technique. 
2.8.1 Disc Diffusion Method  
The disc diffusion method is one of the most convenient techniques to determine the anti-bacterial properties of TA-based fibers. The anti-bacterial features of TA-based fibers were examined by means of the disc diffusion method on E. coli and S. aureus bacteria cultures. On nutrient agar plate, 0.1 mL of bacterial strain set to McFarland 0.5 standard were seeded. TA fibers were weighed to 20.0 mg and placed on pre-planted bacteria strain to investigate the diameter of the inhibition zone. The agar plates were incubated at 35 °C in an oven for 24 hours. The following day, the diameter of the inhibition zone was measured, and photographs of the agar plates were taken.
3.	Results and Discussion 
3.1 Characterization
The fact that TA has many natural properties and biological functions, e.g., anti-oxidant, anti-bacterial, anti-inflammatory, makes it an attractive biomolecule for medicinal use. The ample number of hydroxyl groups make TA useful as crosslinking agents or modifiable to render additional properties. Here, TA-based fibers were prepared by adjusting flow rate, voltage and finally distance from Taylor cone to collector of the electrospinning instrument as specified earlier following the reported procedure [34].  Molecular structure of the TA oligomer is shown in Fig 1. (a), and as the digital camera of TA fiber demonstrated in Fig 1. (b), the morphology of TA fibers is a smooth surface with white color. The flow rate and voltage of the electrospinning device were fixed at certain parameters so that the diameter of TA fibers was about 500 nm and obtained uniformly, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (c).

Fig. 1. 

The thermal degradation profiles of TA-based fibers were also assessed by employing a TGA instrument in the heating range 30-1000 °C. The degradation of TA molecule was observed between 30-240 °C with 5% weight loss, mostly due to the loss of water, and then it was completed at 245 °C with 100% weight loss as shown in Fig 2 (a). The thermal degradation of TA-based fibers occurred in 30-225 °C range with 2.5±1wt% loss that can be attributed to water. The thermal degradation profile of TA fibers is different than the TA molecule, which has two main degradation steps; 250-320 °C and 320-538 °C with the total weight losses of 55% and almost 100%, respectively, and this suggests the interaction of TA molecules within fibers via hydrogen bonding and π-π interactions. As revealed in Figure 2 (b), TA-based fibers which are TA fibers, crosslinked TA fibers, and TA fibers containing ibuprofen and crosslinked TA-Ibu fibers have different thermal degradation profiles. Thermal degradation of crosslinked TA fibers occurred in three main steps in contrast to bare TA fibers. These are between 190-275 °C, 276-410 °C and 411-465 °C and the weight losses were measured cumulatively as 26.0, 75.0 and 90.0 wt%. In total, the weight loss of crosslinked TA fibers was 98.7% at 1000 °C with the remaining weight 1.3 %. Crosslinking of TA-based fibers reduced the weight loss. TA-Ibu fibers displayed a two step degradation profile between 210-295 °C and 296-520 °C with weight losses of 38.8 and 97.8 wt%, respectively. TA-Ibu fiber was entirely degraded by heating up to 1000 °C. The thermal behavior of crosslinked TA-Ibu fibers also had two degradation steps. The onset of the first degradation step was from 145 to 260 °C, and the second step was occurred between 261-445 °C, and the weight losses were cumulatively 17.0 and 75.6%, respectively. The residue from crosslinked TA-Ibu fibers was the highest among all the TA-based fibers. Additionally, the crosslinker made the TA-based fibers more thermally stable and durable.

Fig. 2. 

Analysis of functional groups on TA-based fibers were confirmed by FT-IR spectroscopic analysis. All TA fibers possess many hydroxyl and carboxylic esters in the structure as shown in Fig. 1(a). The stretching at about 3700-3580 cm-1 for free hydroxyl groups is moderately sharp. Bands at about 3550-3200 cm-1 and 3200-2700 cm-1 for intermolecular and intra molecular H-bonding for the alcohols, respectively, come from the gallic units on TA and are clearly seen as strong broad and weak broad peaks, respectively. Also, weak -CH- peaks for aromatic compounds that overlap at about 2000-1650 range are assumed to exist in all TA-based materials. For all the TA and TA-based fibers stretching at about 1700 and 1705 cm-1 can be attributed to C=O bonds for the bare and crosslinked fibers. These peaks are represented as carboxylic ester bonds for bare TA fibers and due to generation of new aldehyde ester bonds after crosslinking with NaIO4 treatments for crosslinked TA fibers. Therefore, the crosslinked fiber has wider stretching than TA molecule and TA fibers. Also, the crosslinking with NaIO4 of TA-based fibers reduced the strength of the C-C bond that appeared at 1535 cm-1 [47]. For C=C bonds, a strong peak at 1605 cm-1 is visible for all the TA-based materials. Ibuprofen was possessed characteristic peaks at 1723 cm-1 as C=O stretching bend from carboxylic acid functional group and at 2923 cm-1 as OH group. Ibuprofen has aromatic, and carboxylic acid groups in the structure, so very similar peaks for ibuprofen containing fibers e.g., C=O, -CH-, and C=C peaks, were enhanced by the corresponding intensities at 1701, 1650 and 1605 cm-1, respectively. 
3.2 Degradation and Drug Release of TA-based Fibers
	As the TA molecule has many appealing features like the most essential ones of anti-oxidant, anti-bacterial and blood clotting effects, the release of TA molecules by degradation of TA-based fibers were evaluated. The bare TA fibers were degraded instantly in 10 minutes in PBS media, while the crosslinked TA and TA-ibu fibers degraded about 53.5% and 41.0%, respectively, in about 7 h, as can be seen in Fig. 3(a). In 24 h, 78.3±4.0% and 73.6±3.0% of crosslinked TA and TA-Ibu fibers were degraded. The degradation was monitored for 168 hours (7 days), and the degradation % of crosslinked TA and TA-Ibu fibers were determined as 83.1±5.3 and 98.9±2.2%, respectively. Degradation of crosslinked TA fiber was slower than crosslinked TA-Ibu fibers. About 15% quicker degradation of crosslinked TA-Ibu fiber can be attributed to the lower amount of crosslinking in TA-Ibu fiber, in comparison to crosslinked TA fibers as the same amounts of NaIO4 were used for crosslinking of both fibers. Thus, TA release occurred faster for the crosslinked TA-Ibu fibers in comparison to bare crosslinked TA fibers. 
Fig. 3.

Ibuprofen is known as the 3rd most prescribed medicine in world, used in the treatment of various inflammations and for reduction of pain in the body [48]. Therefore, the release of ibuprofen from TA fibers, especially for wound dressing and/or medical textile applications, has paramount significance as the double drugs of TA molecule and ibuprofen can be simultaneously released from crosslinked TA-Ibu fibers. These kinds of double releases of active agents such as TA as a versatile drug in itself with anti-oxidant and antibacterial effects and ibuprofen as analgesic would be very effective in open wounds and burn wounds with high degree, e.g., 3rd degree burns. As illustrated in Fig. 3 (b), the ibuprofen release profile from crosslinked TA-Ibu fibers is very similar to TA release profiles from crosslinked fibers. The non-crosslinked TA-Ibu fibers were found to degrade in 5 min in PBS, which is 100% release of ibuprofen. The amount of drug degrading from TA-Ibu fibers was also measured by UV-VIS spectroscopy as described previously in Section 1.5. The ibuprofen content of TA fibers was 1 wt% based on TA amounts keeping in mind that the amount of ibuprofen can be readily tuned as it is just added to the TA fiber precursor during preparation. The ibuprofen release was linear up 12 h with 79.2±2.4% release, which is very important as a pain killer for open wounds, then the release profile was very slow. At end of 5 days of release time, 97.5±4.7% of ibuprofen was released from crosslinked TA-ibu fibers. Thus, these fibers are resourceful materials for dual, or more, active agent release as wound dressing material with controllable release profiles. 
3.3 Blood Compatibility of TA-based Fibers
The assays of hemolysis and blood clotting index of biomaterials are needed to test for blood contacting applications of fibers, especially in medical textile applications. Hemolysis tests are usually employed to detect disrupted red blood cells by measuring the hemoglobin molecule that is normally within healthy red blood cells. Hemolysis% is expected to be in the range of 0-5% to be acknowledged as non-hemolytic for any material in interaction with blood. On the other hand, hemolysis from 5-100% is recognized as hemolytic. TA-based fibers were examined via hemolysis test and the results are illustrated in Fig. 4(a), and the bare TA-based fibers were found to be non-hemolytic up to 2 mg/mL. The TA fiber was 0.6±0.2, 1.4±0.4 and 1.2±0.1% hemolytic at 0.5, 1.0 and 2.0 mg/mL concentration, respectively. The non-crosslinked TA fibers containing ibuprofen were also non-hemolytic up to 2 mg/mL concentration with the values of 0.6±0.5, 0.7±0.2 and 0.8±0.3%, respectively, for the relevant concentrations. The crosslinked TA-based fibers on the other hand were concluded to be hemolytic. Hemolysis% of crosslinked TA fibers for 0.5, 1.0 and 2.0 mg/mL concentrations were calculated as 14.8±3.8, 16.9±2.7 and 28.9±6.3%, respectively. Finally, hemolysis% of crosslinked TA-Ibu fiber was found to be 8.6±1.7, 15.7±2.4 and 26.8±5.3% in order for 0.5, 1 and 2 mg/mL concentrations. The increase in hemolysis% of the crosslinked fibers can be attributed to generation of newly-formed groups of aldehyde and ester as the crosslinking agent, NaIO4, oxidized TA fibers generating aldehyde groups that can interact with phenolic hydroxyl groups on TA [34]. 
Determination of the blood clotting index is another commonly accepted method for determination of the blood compatibility of materials. As the inference with clotting mechanisms maybe beneficial in some cases, e.g., sometimes blood clotting is necessary to prevent excess bleeding and can be useful in wound dressing applications and may not be necessary in some other cases. If the blood clotting index is <100, it is assumed that the blood contacting material affects the clotting mechanism negatively, then again if this value is ≥100, it affects the clotting mechanism positively or there is no interference with the blood clothing mechanisms. TA-based fibers were determined to have negative clotting effect on the blood system as illustrated in Fig. 4(b). The fibers most affecting the blood clotting index are the non-crosslinked TA fibers and non-crosslinked TA-Ibuprofen fibers.
Fig. 4. 

The blood clotting index for non-crosslinked TA fibers was determined as 76.5±0.8, 53.2±8.2 and 52.5±4.4 at 0.5, 1 and 2 mg/mL concentrations, respectively, whereas the non-crosslinked TA-Ibu fibers had blood clotting index determined as 52.6±1.0, 39.1±3.3 and 8.7±1.6 at these particular concentrations. As can be seen, the inclusion of ibuprofen within TA fibers somewhat reduced the blood clotting index. On the other hand, the crosslinked TA-based fibers displayed somewhat lesser effectiveness on clotting mechanism in comparison to the non-crosslinked fibers. The blood clotting index of crosslinked TA fibers was calculated as 99.7±0.3, 72.2±2.9 and 67.8±0.9 at 0.5, 1 and 2 mg/mL concentrations, respectively, whereas the values for crosslinked TA-Ibu fibers were 65.9±0.5, 64.2±0.3 and 59.4±4.0 at the same concentrations. Therefore, it can be deduced that the crosslinked TA-based fibers were less effective on blood clotting mechanism. As degradation of non-crosslinked TA fiber occurred faster in comparison to crosslinked TA fiber, this outcome is reasonable. Also, the crosslinked and non-crosslinked TA fibers can induce higher clotting mechanism in comparison to their ibuprofen containing counterparts. Moreover, as shown in Fig 4. (c), the crosslinked fiber is not very soluble in water, while on the contrary bare TA fibers were highly soluble in water. To be able to indicate the fiber in water without blood cells, photographs of crosslinked TA fiber were taken and the red blood cells without the fibers are shown in Fig. 4(d) and have spherical shapes. Upon interaction of the non-crosslinked TA fibers with red blood cells, given in Fig. 4(e), the fiber did not damage red blood cells, and the blood cells gathered in and around the fibers as proof that the fibers assisted clotting by accumulating blood cells around the wound.  
3.4 Anti-oxidant Features of TA-based Fibers  
The human body can produce free radicals that damage cells by causing apoptosis. Anti-oxidant materials can prevent the formation of radicals or slow down the radical production mechanism [49]. As TA is a well-known molecule for its anti-oxidant properties, the anti-oxidant activity of TA-based fibers was also investigated by means of Trolox equivalent anti-oxidant capacity (TEAC), total phenol content (TPC) assay and total flavonoid content (TFC) [50–52]. As TA comprises of 10 gallic acid molecules, a well-known anti-oxidant material as gallic acid is even used as a reference anti-oxidant material in determination of the anti-oxidant properties of some unknown molecules. TEAC, TPC and TFC assays of TA fibers were completed and results were compared with gallic acid and quercetin. The results of the anti-oxidant test of TA-based fibers are summarized in Table 1. TEAC values of gallic acid was measured as 9.1±0.4 mM Trolox equivalent/g. Gallic acid and quercetin concentrations were chosen at 250 µg/mL as reference anti-oxidant material for TPC and TFC tests, respectively.

Table 1.

High anti-oxidant capacity of TA-based fibers were measured as the TEAC values of TA, crosslinked TA, TA-Ibu and crosslinked TA-Ibu were calculated as 5.7±0.5, 1.8 ±1.1, 4.3±0.2 and 2.2±0.1 mM trolox equivalent/g. This result shows that non-crosslinked TA-based fibers have higher anti-oxidant features in comparison to the crosslinked TA-based fibers. Also, TPC values of TA, crosslinked TA, TA-Ibu and crosslinked TA-Ibu fibers were measured as 168±2.0, 109.5±0.8, 167.8±1.0 and 97.7±14.3 µg/mL, respectively. Furthermore, determination of flavonoids was executed by TFC and the results of TA, crosslinked TA, TA-Ibu and crosslinked TA-Ibu were found as 193.0±17.0, 36.8±3.0, 168.4±2.0 and 9.4±4.0 µg/mL, respectively. As expected, the highest value belonged to TA fibers. Again, each test confirms that non-crosslinked TA-based fibers possess higher anti-oxidant properties. As the crosslinked TA-based fibers had TA release capabilities that were much slower that the non-crosslinked fibers, this result is pertinent and corroborates with the release or degradation studies as given in Fig. 3(a) and (b). As non-crosslinked TA fibers can readily dissolve in PBS solution whereas the dissolution of crosslinked TA fibers is time dependent. These results also confirm that the degradation of properties of the crosslinked fibers maybe useful to render long-term anti-oxidant activity of fibers for wound dressing applications.
3.5 Anti-bacterial activities of TA-based Fibers
	Anti-bacterial capacity of TA-based fibers were investigated for E. coli (gram -) and S. aureus (gram +). It is already known that TA possesses anti-bacterial properties [53]. The disc diffusion method was used to measure the antibacterial properties of the fibers to determine the diameter of the inhibition zone. Tannic acid was reported to be more effective on gram + bacteria than on gram – bacteria [53], and this was validated by TA-based fibers as shown in Table 2 in which the 10 mg inhibition zone diameter is given for TA-based fibers (gentamicin was used as reference).

Table 2. 


 Crosslinked TA-based fibers had the lowest inhibition zone diameters, apart from the crosslinked TA-Ibu fibers, on S. aureus bacteria which was 3.4±0.3 cm. The highest zone diameter was observed against S. aureus as 3.5±0.2 cm for TA-Ibu fibers and the second highest inhibition zone for S. aureus was obtained for the crosslinked TA-Ibu fibers. This could be attributed to the presence of ibuprofen. Non-crosslinked TA fibers had a broader zone of 3.1±0.3 cm than TA at 2.9±0.2 cm; however, the inhibition zone diameter of crosslinked TA fibers was measured as 1.8±0.2 cm. Even though the effectiveness of anti-bacterial activity on E. coli is lower than S. aureus, TA-based fibers still possessed some anti-bacterial potency against E. coli. The inhibition zone diameters for TA molecule, TA, crosslinked TA, TA-Ibu and crosslinked TA-Ibu fibers were measured as 2.4±0.1, 3.0±0.2, 1.5±0.3, 2.2±0.5 and 1.9±0.2 cm, respectively. 
Fig. 5. 

These zone inhibition diameters of TA-based fibers are illustrated in Fig. 5. The control, gentamicin as a model drug for comparison with TA and TA-based fibers, had the best result against both E. coli and S. aureus with the largest inhibition zone diameters of 3.1±0.4 cm and 3.7±1.6 cm, respectively. Still, the TA fibers possess comparable antibacterial capabilities against both microorganisms suggesting the potential utilization of these TA-based fibers for prophylaxis to prevent bacterial infections especially for open wounds and/or scars in medical textile applications.
4.	Conclusion
TA is a multi-functional molecule with many natural biological properties in addition to coagulant effects, and the generation of fibers of TA alone or with some other drug such as ibuprofen or other active materials make TA-based materials superior, especially for wound dressing applications. TA-based fibers furthermore were crosslinked by simple NaIO4 treatment whether they contained the drug or not which significantly affected the degradation of TA molecules, while the drug molecule also further improved the adaptability and successful use of TA-based fiber for bio-medical applications as medical textile in wound dressings. As shown, the inclusion of ibuprofen as an anti-inflammatory drug increased the potency of bare TA fibers; thus, it provided even more efficient and enhanced assets to TA fibers, i.e., increased antibacterial and analgesic properties. Also, the non-hemolytic and concentration dependent blood clotting index of TA fiber bestow additional attributes for their successful utilization as a potent asset in the biomedical field. Therefore, TA fibers provide new routes with tunable biological capability in combination with various materials for health-related applications.
